Challenge 4_ Crop Questions/Bliu/README.md, before:

## Beatrice Liu: Challenge 4 - Crop Questions Analysis 

## Overview
Conducted word frequency analysis on questions by **Kenyan Farmers** in the Producers Direct Dataset of WeFarm SMS; created interactive and static visualizations of top bi-, tri-, and quad-grams on top 5 topics -  cattle, tomato, maize, chickens, none -  to identify patterns and relationships and communicate insights concisely. Note:  I can't figure out how to display the interactive graphs here; they are saved in the network_graphs folder.

See *'farmers.bliu.pdf'* for summary of findings

## Research Question
- What insights can be gleaned from Crop-specific and Crop-Independent Questions?  


## Methodology: *detailed explanations in the Jupyter Notebooks*

### Data Sources
- Producers Direct Dataset of WeFarm SMS
- Swahili [stopword](https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/mmf4hnsm2n/1) and [verb conjugation](https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/rvt89578g5/1) files  

### Approach: *Notebook overviews describe steps in greater detail* 
1. Data loading and initial exploration
2. Data cleaning and preprocessing
3. Data segmentation into smaller datasets for analyses: unique questions asked by farmers in 4 countries
4. Filtered dataset for questions by Kenyan farmers
5. Natural Language Processing - remove punctuation marks, convert to lowercase, tokenize using custom list of stopwords and lemma dictionaries
6. Count word occurances in list of words created in Step 5
7. Generate list of tuples for more frequent words for visualization and interpretation


### Output Files and Visualizations
- Cleaned data files and interactive visualizations can be found in [google drive folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1tpwqTqoFfZCWvDvncJjaSbzzua0Y6Q_i?usp=sharing)
- Note:  visualizations are uploaded to github in 'network_graphs' folder
- N-gram frequency graphs can be found in individual notebooks *(the PNG files cropped out the n-gram text)*


### Tools and Technologies
- **Programming Language**: Python 3.13.5 
- **Key Libraries**: pandas, numpy, matplotlib, nltk, deep-language... - full list is in the notebooks
- **GenAI Tools Used**: ChatGPT, Anaconda Toolbox
- **Other Tools**: Jupyter Notebook


### Tools Used
- **ChatGPT**: Used for generating code for natural language processing functions in English, translating Swahili tokens into English
- **Anaconda Toolbox**: Used for generating interactive network graphs

### Human Review Process
- All AI-generated code was reviewed and tested for accuracy
- Modified AI suggestions in the following ways: fixed a surprising number of coding errors


## Key Findings: *Refer to 'farmers.bliu.pdf'*


### Finding: Translating from Swahili is a **major** roadblock
- Swahili is an under-resourced language in Natural Language Processing
- Commonly used Python packages such as SpaCy, NLTK, or Gensim do not have inherent Swahili support
- It is an agglutinative language:  prefixes, roots, and suffixes are combined into one word.  It also has complex noun class structures, that affect verb agreement.  These can lead to ineffective lemmatization.
- Accurate translations require an agricultural corpus on rural farming in Africa, and custom lists of words and lemma dictionary.   


### Additional Findings:  *Refer to 'farmers.bliu.pdf'*
- With These Challenges, Swahili Trigrams Translated in English – All Topics –  Were More Informative Than Bi- or Quadgrams
- Tri-grams of English Questions Without a Topic Still Focused on Farming:  e.g. Best Practices on Birthing Calves, Planting Maize and Starting a Poultry Farm
- Cattle Farmers in Kenya Focused on Giving Birth, Milk Production, and Health
- Chicken Farmers in Kenya Asked About Young Chicks, Laying Eggs, and Medicines
- Maize Farmers in Kenya Asked About the Best Fertilizer and Weed Control, Best Seeds and Planting
- Tomato Farmers in Kenya Asked About Planting, Best Seeds, and Keeping Tomatoes Disease-Free


## Static Network Visualizations: *see file list below for interactive graphs* 
![Tri-Grams Network Graph](top30trigrams_ken_eng_Notopic_network.png)
![Bi-Grams Network Graph](top40bigrams_ken_eng_Notopic_network.png)
![2nd Bi-Grams Network Graph](top40bigrams_ken_eng_network.png)
![2nd Tri-Grams Network Graph](top40trigrams_ken_eng_network.png)

## Limitations and Challenges

### Data Limitations
- Missing data issues:  gender, country-level location, nothing more granular
- Data quality concerns: vague data dictionary
- Translations:  These African languages are linguistically complex, with unique syntax, idioms, and dialectal variations that are region-specific  

### Methodological Limitations
- Assumptions made: *'blocked'* and *'destroyed'* user statuses were dropped from analysis
- Impractical to call GoogleTranslate to translate the full text of > 2 mm questions:  extracted and translated most frequent word combination in the questions
  
### Technical Challenges
- Translation accuracy issues - **YES** *see above*

### References
1. Bernard Masua, Noel Masasi, "Enhancing text pre-processing for Swahili language: Datasets for common Swahili stop-words, slangs and typos with equivalent proper words",
Data in Brief, Volume 33, 2020, 106517, ISSN 2352-3409, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2020.106517
2. Mathayo, Irene; Kondoro, Alfred Malengo (2025), “Swahili Verb Conjugation Dataset: A Comprehensive Analysis of Agglutination and Verb Structure Across Tenses and Persons”, Mendeley Data, V3, doi: 10.17632/rvt89578g5.3
3. Bernard Masua, Noel Masasi, "In the heart of Swahili: An exploration of data collection methods and corpus curation for natural language processing", Data in Brief,Volume 55,2024,110751,ISSN 2352-3409,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2024.110751

  
## Files in This Contribution

```
Bliu_analysis/
├── README.md (this file)
├── notebooks/
│   ├── question_preprocess.ipynb
│   └── kenya_q_swa.ipynb
│       └──nlp_swa.ipynb
│       └──translate.ipynb
│   ├── kenya_q_eng.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_q_notopic.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_cattle.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_chicken.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_maize.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_tomato.ipynb
├── 10 directed interactive network visualizations/
│   ├── {xx}bigram_eng_ken_{topic}_network.html
│── static directed network visualizations/
│   └── top40trigrams_ken_eng_network.png
│   └── top40bigrams_ken_eng_network.png
│   └── top40bigrams_ken_eng_Notopic_network.png
│   └── top30trigrams_ken_eng_network.png
├── results - displayed in notebooks /
│   ├── farmers.bliu.pdf - sorry, no markdown file
└── translated n-grams from swahili to english data/ 
    └── ken_240quadgrams_swa2eng.txt
    └── ken_500bigrams_swa2eng.txt
    └── ken_500trigrams_swa2eng.txt
```

### How to Run This Analysis -- *I have no clue, worked in Jupyter Notebook*


## Open and run notebooks in order:
![Order of Jupyter Notebooks](Jupyter_notebook_order_bliu.png)

```


**Author**: [Beatrice Liu]
**GitHub**: @bl1412
 

---

**Last Updated**: [12/8/25]

Commit message:

Revise README.md for clarity and detail
Updated the overview section to clarify the analysis and added details on potential applications of the findings. Revised the output files section for better accessibility information.

Challenge 4_ Crop Questions/Bliu/README.md, after:

## Beatrice Liu: Challenge 4 - Crop Questions Analysis 

## Overview
Conducted word frequency analysis on questions by **Kenyan Farmers** in the Producers Direct Dataset of WeFarm SMS; created interactive and static visualizations of top bi-, tri-, and quadgrams on top 5 topics -  cattle, tomato, maize, poultry, chickens (grouped with poultry).  Identifying the top n-grams could facilitate:
* Information retrieval:  links to search terms comprised on the most frequent trigrams or quadgrams
* Content generation:
       *  Create a FAQ page that covers the most frequent tri- or quadgrams
       *  Create educational videos on the top question topics with content that covers the top tri- or quadgrams of the questions.  Audio could be in Swahili with English subtitles or vice versa.
  
See *'farmers.bliu.pdf'* for summary of findings

## Research Question
- What insights can be gleaned from Crop-specific and Crop-Independent Questions?  


## Methodology: *detailed explanations in the Jupyter Notebooks*

### Data Sources
- Producers Direct Dataset of WeFarm SMS
- Swahili [stopword](https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/mmf4hnsm2n/1) and [verb conjugation](https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/rvt89578g5/1) files  

### Approach: *Notebook overviews describe steps in greater detail* 
1. Data loading and initial exploration
2. Data cleaning and preprocessing
3. Data segmentation into smaller datasets for analyses: unique questions asked by farmers in 4 countries
4. Filtered dataset for questions by Kenyan farmers
5. Natural Language Processing - remove punctuation marks, convert to lowercase, tokenize using custom list of stopwords and lemma dictionaries
6. Count word occurances in list of words created in Step 5
7. Generate list of tuples for more frequent words for visualization and interpretation


### Output Files and Visualizations
- Cleaned data files and interactive visualizations can be found in [google drive folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1tpwqTqoFfZCWvDvncJjaSbzzua0Y6Q_i?usp=sharing), which can only be accessed with the link
- Note:  visualizations are uploaded to github in 'network_graphs' folder
- N-gram frequency graphs can be found in individual notebooks *(the PNG files cropped out the n-gram text)*


### Tools and Technologies
- **Programming Language**: Python 3.13.5 
- **Key Libraries**: pandas, numpy, matplotlib, nltk, deep-language... - full list is in the notebooks
- **GenAI Tools Used**: ChatGPT, Anaconda Toolbox
- **Other Tools**: Jupyter Notebook


### Tools Used
- **ChatGPT**: Used for generating code for natural language processing functions in English, translating Swahili tokens into English
- **Anaconda Toolbox**: Used for generating interactive network graphs

### Human Review Process
- All AI-generated code was reviewed and tested for accuracy
- Modified AI suggestions in the following ways: fixed a surprising number of coding errors


## Key Findings: *Refer to 'farmers.bliu.pdf'*


### Finding: Translating from Swahili is a **major** roadblock
- Swahili is an under-resourced language in Natural Language Processing
- Commonly used Python packages such as SpaCy, NLTK, or Gensim do not have inherent Swahili support
- It is an agglutinative language:  prefixes, roots, and suffixes are combined into one word.  It also has complex noun class structures, that affect verb agreement.  These can lead to ineffective lemmatization.
- Accurate translations require an agricultural corpus on rural farming in Africa, and custom lists of words and lemma dictionary.   


### Additional Findings:  *Refer to 'farmers.bliu.pdf'*
- With These Challenges, Swahili Trigrams Translated in English – All Topics –  Were More Informative Than Bi- or Quadgrams
- Tri-grams of English Questions Without a Topic Still Focused on Farming:  e.g. Best Practices on Birthing Calves, Planting Maize and Starting a Poultry Farm
- Cattle Farmers in Kenya Focused on Giving Birth, Milk Production, and Health
- Chicken Farmers in Kenya Asked About Young Chicks, Laying Eggs, and Medicines
- Maize Farmers in Kenya Asked About the Best Fertilizer and Weed Control, Best Seeds and Planting
- Tomato Farmers in Kenya Asked About Planting, Best Seeds, and Keeping Tomatoes Disease-Free


## Static Network Visualizations: *see file list below for interactive graphs* 
![Tri-Grams Network Graph](top30trigrams_ken_eng_Notopic_network.png)
![Bi-Grams Network Graph](top40bigrams_ken_eng_Notopic_network.png)
![2nd Bi-Grams Network Graph](top40bigrams_ken_eng_network.png)
![2nd Tri-Grams Network Graph](top40trigrams_ken_eng_network.png)

## Limitations and Challenges

### Data Limitations
- Missing data issues:  gender, country-level location, nothing more granular
- Data quality concerns: vague data dictionary
- Translations:  These African languages are linguistically complex, with unique syntax, idioms, and dialectal variations that are region-specific  

### Methodological Limitations
- Assumptions made: *'blocked'* and *'destroyed'* user statuses were dropped from analysis
- Impractical to call GoogleTranslate to translate the full text of > 2 mm questions:  extracted and translated most frequent word combination in the questions
  
### Technical Challenges
- Translation accuracy issues - **YES** *see above*

### References
1. Bernard Masua, Noel Masasi, "Enhancing text pre-processing for Swahili language: Datasets for common Swahili stop-words, slangs and typos with equivalent proper words",
Data in Brief, Volume 33, 2020, 106517, ISSN 2352-3409, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2020.106517
2. Mathayo, Irene; Kondoro, Alfred Malengo (2025), “Swahili Verb Conjugation Dataset: A Comprehensive Analysis of Agglutination and Verb Structure Across Tenses and Persons”, Mendeley Data, V3, doi: 10.17632/rvt89578g5.3
3. Bernard Masua, Noel Masasi, "In the heart of Swahili: An exploration of data collection methods and corpus curation for natural language processing", Data in Brief,Volume 55,2024,110751,ISSN 2352-3409,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2024.110751

  
## Files in This Contribution

```
Bliu_analysis/
├── README.md (this file)
├── notebooks/
│   ├── question_preprocess.ipynb
│   └── kenya_q_swa.ipynb
│       └──nlp_swa.ipynb
│       └──translate.ipynb
│   ├── kenya_q_eng.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_q_notopic.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_cattle.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_chicken.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_maize.ipynb
│       └──nlp_eng_tomato.ipynb
├── 10 directed interactive network visualizations/
│   ├── {xx}bigram_eng_ken_{topic}_network.html
│── static directed network visualizations/
│   └── top40trigrams_ken_eng_network.png
│   └── top40bigrams_ken_eng_network.png
│   └── top40bigrams_ken_eng_Notopic_network.png
│   └── top30trigrams_ken_eng_network.png
├── results - displayed in notebooks /
│   ├── farmers.bliu.pdf - sorry, no markdown file
└── translated n-grams from swahili to english data/ 
    └── ken_240quadgrams_swa2eng.txt
    └── ken_500bigrams_swa2eng.txt
    └── ken_500trigrams_swa2eng.txt
```

### How to Run This Analysis -- *I have no clue, worked in Jupyter Notebook*


## Open and run notebooks in order:
![Order of Jupyter Notebooks](Jupyter_notebook_order_bliu.png)

```


**Author**: [Beatrice Liu]
**GitHub**: @bl1412
 

---

**Last Updated**: [12/8/25]
